.\" rundetach.8
.\" wcm, 2009.12.11 - 2011.03.18
.\" ===
.TH rundetach 8 "January 2013" "runtools-2.07" "runtools"
.SH NAME
rundetach \- run a program in the background
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B rundetach [\-hV]
.I program
.B [
.I args ...
.B ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B rundetach
forks a child process into the background,
detached from a controlling terminal,
in its own session and process group.
It then runs
.I program
with any additional arguments given in
.IR args .
.PP
If
.I program
does not contain a ``/'' slash character,
.B rundetach
will perform a shell-like search for the executable using the
.B PATH
variable in the current environment.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-h
Help.
Print a brief usage message to stderr and exit.
.TP
.B \-V
Version.
Print the version number to stderr and exit.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.B rundetach
exits with one of the following values:
.TP
0
.I program
was invoked and completed successfully.
In this case,
the exit code is returned by the
.IR program ,
rather than by
.B rundetach
itself.
.TP
100
.B rundetach
failed because of a usage error,
such as an invalid command\-line option or argument.
In this case,
.B rundetach
prints a brief error message and usage help to stderr on exit.
.TP
111
.B rundetach
failed due to some system or resource error.
In this case,
.B rundetach
prints a brief diagnostic message to stderr on exit.
.TP
1\-127
.I program
was invoked and failed with its own non-zero exit status.
.SH AUTHOR
Wayne Marshall, http://b0llix.net/perp/
.SH SEE ALSO
.nh
.BR runtools_intro (8),
.BR runargs (8),
.BR runargv0 (8),
.BR runchoom (8),
.BR rundeux (8),
.BR runenv (8),
.BR runfile (8),
.BR runlimit (8),
.BR runlock (8),
.BR runpause (8),
.BR runsession (8),
.BR runtool (8),
.BR runtrap (8),
.BR runuid (8)
.\" EOF
