.\" runsession.8
.\" wcm, 2009.12.11 - 2009.12.15
.\" ===
.TH runsession 8 "January 2013" "runtools-2.07" "runtools"
.SH NAME
runsession \- run a program in a new session/process group
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B runsession [\-hV]
.I program
.B [
.I args ...
.B ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B runsession
sets up a new session and process group with
.BR setsid (2),
then runs
.I program
with any additional
.IR args .
.PP
If
.I program
does not contain a ``/'' slash character,
.B runsession
will perform a shell-like search for the executable using the
.B PATH
variable in the current environment.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-h
Help.
Print a brief usage message to stderr and exit.
.TP
.B \-V
Version.
Print the version number to stderr and exit.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.B runsession
exits with one of the following values:
.TP
0
.I program
was invoked and completed successfully.
In this case,
the exit code is returned by the
.IR program ,
rather than by
.B runsession
itself.
.TP
100
.B runsession
failed because of a usage error,
such as an invalid command\-line option or argument.
In this case,
.B runsession
prints a brief error message and usage help to stderr on exit.
.TP
111
.B runsession
failed due to some system or resource error.
In this case,
.B runsession
prints a brief diagnostic message to stderr on exit.
.TP
1\-127
.I program
was invoked and failed with its own non-zero exit status.
.SH AUTHOR
Wayne Marshall, http://b0llix.net/perp/
.SH SEE ALSO
.nh
.BR runtools_intro (8),
.BR runargs (8),
.BR runargv0 (8),
.BR runchoom (8),
.BR rundetach (8),
.BR rundeux (8),
.BR runenv (8),
.BR runfile (8),
.BR runlimit (8),
.BR runlock (8),
.BR runpause (8),
.BR runtool (8),
.BR runtrap (8),
.BR runuid (8)
.\" EOF
